We're going to derive the Friedman Le Metre Robertson Walker metric, also called the
FLRW metric for short. This is the metric that describes the expansion of the universe over time, which is
used in the standard model of cosmology. The FLRW metric was discovered and developed
independently by four different physicists and so the metric is named after all of them. The FLRW metric
is actually three metrics combined into one depending on the value of k, which is positive one for a
closed universe, zero for a flat universe and negative one for an open universe. In later videos we'll use
the FLRW metric to derive the Friedman equations which directly govern the rate of the universe's
expansion based on mass, density, pressure, curvature and the cosmological constant. 1s So our goal for
this video is to derive a metric that describes the large scale geometry of the entire universe and this will
be the FLRW metric. 1s This metric can be derived from one fundamental assumption about the nature of
the universe. This fundamental assumption is called the cosmological principle, which has two parts. The
first assumption of the cosmological principle is that the universe is spatially homogeneous. This means
that the universe looks the same from all points in space. You can think of this as meaning that the
universe doesn't appear to change when we translate our location from one spatial point to another. This
also means that the universe has no spatial center, since all spatial points are equivalent. The second
assumption of the cosmological principle is that the universe is spatially isotropic, and this means that the
universe looks the same in all spatial directions. You can think of this as meaning that the universe
doesn't appear to change when we rotate our frame of reference. 1s Now, you might say that these two
assumptions are obviously false. After all, our solar system has the burning hot sun, a few planets, many
asteroids, and lots of empty space, depending on where you look. So it's obviously not the same at all
locations and in all directions. But when we say the universe is homogeneous and isotropic, we're talking
about the universe on average at the largest scales. If we zoom out from our solar system, we'll see our
galaxy, then galaxy clusters and superclusters, and then the weblike galaxy filament us. At these huge
scales, we can divide the universe into boxes that are hundreds of millions of light years wide. And at this
large scale, most boxes look basically the same. 2s So when we make the assumption that the
cosmological principle is true, we're assuming that the universe looks the same at all points and in all
directions, on average at the largest scales. I said earlier that the FLRW metric covers three metrics in
one. These match up with the three possible spatially homogeneous and isotropic universes, s, which are
the closed, flat, and open universes. Now, from a mathematical point of view, there are actually other
geometries that are spatially homogeneous and isotropic, such as a flat geometry that wraps around at the
edges and makes a taurus shape. However, in this video, I'm going to ignore the more complicated
geometries that have holes in them. So I'm only going to consider the simply connected geometries
without holes. And in this case, there are only three possible options. To start, let's focus on the familiar
flat space case first. 2s The metric for flat spacetime is called the menkovsky metric. We know that in
Cartesian coordinates, the Flat Minkovsky Metric looks like this. And we're using the mostly minus
convention here. If we describe flat spacetime in spherical coordinates instead, the menkovsky metric
looks like this. Let's think about how the Menkovsky metric would change if we assume that the
cosmological principle is true and the universe looks the same at all points in all directions at the largest
scales. Well, notice that the Cosmological principle says that the universe is spatially homogeneous and
spatially isotropic. It doesn't say that the universe is the same over time. So, according to the
Cosmological principle, we can allow the scale of space to change over time. We do this by scaling space
by a factor a of t that depends on time. This has the effect of multiplying the three by three spatial portion
of the metric by a of T squared. Since the spatial metric components are the dot product of two spatial
basis vectors. 1s And we're forced to multiply all the components in the spatial part of the metric by the
same factor because we need to treat all directions as equivalent, since the universe is spatially isotropic.
1s So this metric describes a flat space whose scale changes over time according to the scale factor A of
T. Taken as a whole, this four by four metric represents a curved space time described by a nonzero
remon curvature tensor. But when we look at the three by three spatial part of the metric at a given
instant of time, this three by three metric represents a flat space with a spatial Riemann curvature tensor

that equals zero. So even if the individual spatial slices in this metric are flat, spacetime as a whole is
curved, provided that a of T is not constant. So a flat 3d space whose scale is changing over time with a
scaling function. A of T is one possibility for a universe that's spatially homogeneous and isotropic. But
that's not the only option. There are two other choices for spatially homogeneous and isotropic universes,
which are the closed universe, also called the spherical universe, and the open universe, which is also
called the hyperbolic universe. Let's look at the case of a spherical universe first. 2s If we look at the
familiar twodimensional spherical surface, all points on the sphere are basically equivalent, and they are
basically the same in all directions. So, just like the flat plane, the sphere also meets the criteria of being
spatially homogeneous and isotropic. But our universe is spatially threedimensional, not twodimensional.
So how would we describe a three dimensional sphere mathematically? 1s Well, we know that the
equation of a circle, sometimes called the onedimensional sphere in the XY plane, is given by X squared
plus Y squared equals r squared, where capital r is the circle's radius. We can also parameterize the circle
by the parameter theta, where x equals r times cosine theta and y equals r times sine theta. If we plug x
and y into this formula and factor out R squared, we can use the trig identity cos squared plus sine
squared equals one to find that this equals r squared. So this parameterization involving theta satisfies our
circle equation. The equation of the two sphere in 3D space is x squared plus Y squared plus z squared
equals the radius squared. 1s We can parameterize the sphere in terms of theta and phi. We can think of
theta as selecting an X coordinate on the sphere. And we can think of phi as tracing out a circle of radius
R times sine theta at that specific X coordinate. If we sub this parameterization into X squared plus Y
squared plus Z squared, we can factor out R squared factor sine squared, and collapse this to a one and
collapse this to a one to get R squared as expected. So this parameterization satisfies the two sphere
equation. Now the equation of a three sphere in 4D space is X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared
plus W squared equals the radius squared. We can't really visualize this easily with a drawing, but we can
parameterize the three sphere in terms of three angle coordinates theta, phi, and chi. To get these, we can
follow the pattern for the parameterizations. For the one sphere and two sphere. The first coordinate is R
times cosine theta. For the next coordinate, we turn cosine into sine and add cos sine phi on the end. For
the third coordinate, we turn cosine into sine and add cosine chi on the end. And for the fourth
coordinate, we turn cosine into sine. We can confirm that this parameterization satisfies our three sphere
equation by factoring out R squared and collapsing all the cosine squared plus sine squareds to ones. If.
We can use these formulas for a sphere in any dimension and we can always follow a similar pattern to
get the parameterization for that dimension. But our spatial universe is three dimensional, so we're just
interested in the three sphere. Recall that the basis vectors for our coordinate system are just the partial
derivatives with respect to the coordinate variables. We can write these basis vectors in terms of the xyzw
basis vectors using multivariable chain rule. And if we work through all these partial derivatives, we get
these formulas for the basis vectors. Now, there are two different metrics we can use to analyze the
geometry of the three sphere. We could use the extrinsic xyzw metric of the surrounding four
dimensional space and this is just the four by four identity matrix or chronicler delta, since the xyzw
basis is Euclidean and orthonormal. Or we could use the intrinsic metric which only uses the angle
parameters theta, phi and chi where the metric components are the dot product of the theta phi chi basis
vectors. If you work through all these dot products, the off diagonal metric components go to zero and
the diagonal metric components look like this. So this is the intrinsic three by three metric of the three
sphere. If. If you take this metric and go through the process of calculating the Ricci scalar for the three
sphere, you'll find that it's a constant positive number everywhere. Six over R squared, where R is the
sphere's radius. A constant, Ricci. Scalar is exactly what we'd expect for a space that's homogeneous and
isotropic. 2s Now, since the names for these three angle coordinate variables are arbitrary, I'm just going
to relabel them so that they look like this. And now we see that the metric for the three sphere almost
looks like our flat metric in spherical coordinates, but with the R coordinate replaced by sine of chi. So
we have a metric for a universe that is spatially flat and another metric for a universe that is spatially
spherical. The third type of metric that is spatially homogeneous. And isotropic is the metric for
hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic Space is a little bit more difficult to visualize. But I'll do what I can to show
you what it looks like. 1s So the two sphere s two is a space where every point looks like two frowns
crossing each other if we're standing on the outside of the sphere, or two smiles crossing each other if
we're standing on the inside of the sphere. The hyperbolic plane h two is a space where every point looks
like a frown and a smile crossing each other. So in two, each point looks like a saddle point. When we
look at a circle of a given circumference in flat space, the area and the circumference of a circle are given
to us by the standard flat space formulas. On a sphere, a circle with the same circumference has an area
that's greater than what we'd see in flat space because the space bulges out and increases the surface area.

In the hyperbolic plane, a circle with the same circumference has an area that's smaller than what we'd
expect in flat space because the circumference wastes a lot of distance going up and down around the
saddle point, and it doesn't enclose as much area. 2s It. The equation for the twodimensional hyperbolic
plane is x squared plus Y squared minus Q squared equals negative R squared. Alternatively, we could
multiply both sides of the equation by negative one to get q squared minus X squared minus Y squared
equals R squared. This gives the equation of a two sheeted hyperboloid. We can parameterize this surface
with angles chi and theta, where the hyperbolic cosine of chi selects the q coordinate of the surface and
theta traces out a circle of radius r times sine h of chi in the XY plane. Now, even though we can draw
this hyperboloid surface, this is not a true representation of the hyperbolic plane, because the distance
function for measuring distances on this hyperboloid are not Euclidean distances, because the metric
signature has minus signs in it. So we cannot accurately judge distances on this surface using our eyes,
because the metric we're using to measure distances is not Euclidean. 2s The hyperbolic plane is usually
visualized using projections of various kinds where the distances and sizes of objects are distorted. This
drawing by Escher is one of the most common visualizations of the hyperbolic plane, where each fish or
triangle occupies the exact same area according to the hyperbolic metric. Even though it doesn't look like
it to our eyes, I've linked to another video in the description that does a really good job of helping
visualize hyperbolic space. 1s With that said, the chi theta parameterization can be substituted into our
Qxy formula for hyperbolic space. After factoring out R squared and factoring sine h squared, this goes
to one, and using the hyperbolic trig identity, cos h squared minus sine h squared equals one. This
becomes negative R squared, as expected. Now to get the formulas for hyperbolic three space. We can
just follow the pattern like we did before. The first coordinate variable equals R times cos h of chi. Then
we change cos h to sine h and add sine on the end. Then we change cosine to sine and add a cosine on the
end. Then we turn cosine into sine. If we plug this parameterization into our formula for hyperbolic three
space after factoring and canceling, we end up with negative R squared at the end. So this
parameterization works if. So no matter what the dimension of hyperbolic space we're looking at is, we
can always use the same pattern to find out the parameterization. But for our purposes, we're only
interested in hyperbolic three space. 1s As before, we can get the basis vectors for chi, theta and phi by
expanding them in terms of the qxyz basis vectors using multivariable chain rule. And as before, we can
use the extrinsic four by four metric with qxyz to measure distances. Or we can use the intrinsic three by
three metric with chi theta phi. Just like before, the off diagonal metric components go to zero, but the
diagonal components now look like this. If you calculate the reachy scalar for hyperbolic three space,
you'll find that it's a constant negative value everywhere. Negative six over r squared. Again, a constant
reachy scalar everywhere is exactly what we'd expect for a space that's homogeneous and isotropic. So
this is what our metric looks like for hyperbolic three space. It looks the exact same as the metric for the
three sphere, except the sine term is replaced with a hyperbolic sine. 2s So we now have three different
metrics for the three possible homogeneous and isotropic spaces. The spherical space, also called closed
because the space is finite. The flat space and the hyperbolic space, also called open because it goes out
to infinity. And for consistency, I'm going to replace the flat spaces R variable with chi. You. We can
now insert these three by three spatial metrics into the spatial part of our four by four spacetime matrix,
where these spatial parts are multiplied by the scaling factor A of T, which is consistent with a spatially
homogeneous and isotropic universe. I'm also ignoring the capital R parameters for the spherical and
hyperbolic geometries, since that's a constant that can be absorbed into a of T, which basically plays the
same role of telling us how curved the space is. These three metrics are basically the exact same, except
for the role of the chi coordinate. 1s The chi coordinate is sort of like a radial coordinate that points out
from the origin of the coordinate system. Although chi doesn't measure the true distance from the origin,
for a closed universe chi is the circular angle measured outward from the origin. And for an open
universe, chi is the hyperbolic angle measured outward from the origin. It's also important to remember
that since the scale of the universe is changing over time with the scale factor A of t, the actual distance
represented by one unit of chi is also changing over time. 1s Mathematicians have actually come up with
a trick to write down all three of these metrics using a single unified metric. And this is done by
introducing a parameter k, which is either plus 10 or negative one. 1s We can do this by rewriting the chi
terms as the variable r. So for a closed universe, r equals sine of chi. For a flat universe, r equals chi, and
for an open universe, r equals hyperbolic sine of chi. So what we're doing here is we're basically doing a
change of variables where the CT, theta, and phi coordinates stay the same. But the chi coordinate is
rescaled to a new coordinate called r. Remember, basis vectors are just the derivative operators with
respect to coordinate variables. So to convert between a chi basis vector and an r basis vector, we use the
chain rule conversion term dr by d chi. If we look at this derivative for each of the three universes, we get

cosine of chi for a closed universe, one for a flat universe, and hyperbolic cosine of chi for an open
universe. 2s In terms of the metric components, GRR equals er and g chi. Chi equals e chi dot e chi. So
the conversion factor between them is the square of this derivative. For the closed universe, cosine of chi
squared is just one minus sine of chi squared. And since sine of chi is just r, this is also equal to one
minus r squared. For a flat universe, we just leave one squared as one. For the open universe, cos h of chi
squared equals one plus sine h of chi squared. But since sine h of chi is just r, this becomes one plus r
squared. 1s So we can rewrite all three of these conversion factors using the form one minus k r squared,
where k is plus one for a closed universe, zero for a flat universe, or negative one for an open universe.
So what we've learned is that to convert from the GRR metric component to the g chi chi metric
component, we multiply by the square of this derivative, which is one minus k r squared. And going in
the other direction from chi to r, we divide by one minus k r squared. 1s So to change our metric from
using the chi coordinate to using the R coordinate, we divide the G chi chi component by one minus KR
squared to turn it into the GRR component. Then we replace the various chi functions with R as we've
defined up here. The resulting metric describes all three spatially homogeneous and isotropic universes
with a spatial scale factor A of T that can change over time. This is the FLRW metric, which can describe
an expanding universe. Before the end of the video, I'll say one more thing about this coordinate change
from chi to R that we did, which will hopefully make things more clear for the closed universe. The chi
theta phi chord are all circular angles used to identify a point on the three sphere. These are called
hyperspherical coordinates. After defining R as sine of chi. The R theta phi coordinates are called
reduced circumference polar coordinates. 1s On the three sphere. The chi coordinate is the angle from the
North Pole to a specific point. We can think of this point as lying on the edge of a disk with a radius
small R. Looking at this triangle, we can see that R equals the sine of chi, which is the definition we
made earlier. And this red disk containing the point has a circumference of two Pi R. Similarly, for the
open universe, chi is a hyperbolic angle and all the other coordinates are circular angles. And we can
define R as sine h of chi. 1s If we look at the hyperboloid sheet, chi is the hyperbolic angle of a point
measured from the vertical axis. Looking at this triangle, we can see that the radius small R of the red
disk is sine h of chi as we defined previously. And the circumference of this disk is again two Pi. 2s So
with the R coordinate, we're not measuring the true walking distance from the origin to a point in the
curved space. Instead, we're drawing a circle around the origin containing that point with a constant
radius. And we define R to be the radius of a flat disk containing this point. R is called the reduced
circumference coordinate. It because it's defined by taking a circumference around the origin and
dividing it by two pi. So, again, the R coordinate is not the walking distance radius from the origin to a
point in curved space. Instead, R is the circumference of a circle containing that point reduced by a factor
of two pi. We actually saw something similar for the Schwartz shield coordinates in video 108 B, where
the R coordinate is equal to a circle's circumference divided by two pi. So the Schwartz shield R
coordinate is also a reduced circumference coordinate, not a true radius. 2s So that's it for this video. In
the next video, we'll compute the various tensors in the Einstein field equations that come from the
FLRW metric, and this will help us solve for the motion of free particles in an expanding universe.

